[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and welcome to this FMTV
special with these two beautiful
sisters, Jasmine and
Melissa, the Hensley sisters.
If you haven't checked out
their blog, make sure to do so.
It's hemsleyandhemsley.com.
They're best selling authors.
They've got their own TV
channel on channel 4 in the UK,
and they're
absolutely beautiful.
They're going to help show
you some special foods
tips and tricks that they
do in their day to day life
to inspire you to better health,
a healthier gut, and also
maybe some ideas on how they
stay so beautiful as well.
So enjoy this interview.
Hi.
>> Hi.
>> What an intro.
>> [INAUDIBLE] so lovely.
>> Great.
Did I get it right?
>> That was really nice.
>> Awesome.
>> We're blushing.
Now, we're really hot.
>> So reading up a little bit
about your history and how you
got started, it seems that
it was a little bit accident,
but I always want to try to get
into the real reasons about why
people started
doing what they do.
>> Maybe accidentally
on purpose.
>> Yeah.
>> There you go.
>> Well, it's a funny one
because I always think it
starts with mom.
Mom is from the Philippines, but
she's been there for 35 years.
She still as Filipino as
when she arrived, I think.
She really-- she was
from a big family who--
and the Filipino culture,
they're Catholic.
They always stick together.
They always cook for each other.
You give your right
arm for your cousin.
And she really taught us
that food is the be-all.
And she hoped we'd be
doctors, so she used to say,
I'm going to feed you
for your big brains,
so you can be doctors
and look after me.
She talked about
avocados for beauty.
She tried to give
Jasmine an avocado
and pass it off as ice
cream when she was younger.
And so mom--
I guess she wasn't a fancy cook.
She didn't cook
from recipe books.
It was very honest, the food
that she grew up on mixed
in with my dad--
our dad who's English's mom,
so there was some English food.
And it was all very much food
to nourish, to feel good,
to share with your family.
So I think that
was the very first
of the beginning
of the accidents.
>> The accidents.
But you come from very
different backgrounds
before you got into food.
>> Yeah, I think we should
also mentioned dad as well,
and mention that mom didn't
say about me being a doctor
for some reason.
She thought I'd be
a newsreader, or I
could marry Prince William.
>> She'd be happy with
one being a doctor,
one being a newsreader--
one being a princess.
>> One being a princess.
Dad, as well, was
very old-fashioned.
His family was kind
of hippie military,
if there is such a thing.
They were travelers.
He had this very waste not,
want not attitude as well,
so it was quite
frugal at our house.
So even though there's this
whole supermarket ready-meal
thing going on, it wasn't
that our parents decided
that home cooking was
best particularly,
or that they were going
to do it a different way.
It wasn't-- I've heard people
have stories about that,
that their parents shunned
that modern way of eating.
It was more that
that's what they knew,
and it always seemed cheaper.
So yeah, dad would--
3/4 of an apple would
be bruised and moldy,
and dad would find
the bit to eat.
And so yeah, we grew up with
home cooking, not wasting food,
and I guess we have quite a
wide, varied palate as well,
because we traveled
quite a bit, and we
met many ethnic
friends and farmers who
had new cuisines and things.
So that was really nice.
>> We spent a couple
of years in Germany,
so we fell in love with
cabbages, sauerkraut.
>> Yeah, sauerkraut.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> So we had a lucky upbringing.
We didn't--
>> It didn't feel
it at the time,
because we weren't
allowed crisps--
>> Exactly.
We weren't allowed crisps.
We didn't go out for dinner.
We never went out
and spent money,
so it was always
food at home, but I
think that person
gets that because what
we are really good at--
Jasmine used to be called
the Leftover Queen.
Are you still called
the Leftover Queen?
>> Why did I lose that title?
>> I don't know.
Maybe you still are.
It's sort of a thing,
now, that we say,
that people are proud
of us to be really
good at using up leftovers.
I think there used
to be this thing of,
I'll just buy food every
day, or I'll go out to eat.
And now, people are really
into going into the fridge
and going, what can I rustle
up from what's left over?
It's a real-- it's a really,
really satisfying thing,
to make a meal out of
whatever's left, bits and bobs.
>> I'll tell you what, I think
'17 or '18, I decided to plant
vegetables in mom's garden--
mom and dad's garden.
>> I don't remember that.
>> And, oh, it was
so much hard work.
It makes you never want to
waste a piece of vegetable
ever again.
And I remember I'd planted
all these Lolo Rosso
lettuces along the borders,
and they were so pretty,
I didn't actually
harvest them in time,
so they all went a bit woody.
But what happened next
was Mel and I, and this--
>> Sorry for this
very long story.
>> There are many ways
into to tell this answer.
So we're about five years,
six years difference in age,
and we--
Mel was working,
actually, in this place.
She worked for pubs and bars for
this chain, as well as being--
I'm telling her story.
She was brand manager for a
shoe brand when she was 19,
so she flew all over the world.
And I had been
modeling on and off
since I was about 15
years old, and I'd
gone to do art and
design at university,
and then went into modeling.
And it was there that
I became very aware
that there was all these
mixed messages about food.
I guess, when
you're modeling, you
realize, very early on, how
to take care of yourself
and also what--
so I knew about sugar being
a problem 10 years ago.
And so I'm still--
I still have to rein
in and be careful
how we speak to people who think
that buying fizzy apple juice
is very different to
another can of soda.
And it was there that I
thought, wow, this soy milk
and this low fat
and this margarine's
not really talking to me.
The food that I
grew up on, which
was butter, meat on the bone--
mom would give us
the bone marrow.
We'd eat our greens.
>> Lost of stews.
>> Lots of stews, lots of
warming foods just seem to make
so much more sense,
and actually,
I felt the difference,
having ventured into, ooh,
I'll do this new
health food bar.
And so I start to read about
all these other different ideas,
and many of them
were conflicting.
Some were raw, some were
meat, others were not meat,
and I found it fascinating,
and rather than being put off,
I just actually really,
really enjoyed doing it.
And so that was when I started
to help people at work,
and Melissa kind
of got on board.
The rest of our
family got on board,
and then the business
basically found us.
Someone came knocking
on the door saying,
I want what you do.
We don't do anything yet.
It's like, I want
you to look after me.
>> We said, we just cook.
We just cook for our
family and friends,
and they were
like, well, can you
just cook for me like I'm
your family or friend,
but I'll pay you?
And we're like, OK,
let's try it for a bit,
and it was brilliant.
It was such great fun.
It was so rewarding.
And then yeah, the
door kept knocking,
and it got to the stage
where we were underground.
I mean, just crazy
cooking and having
fun with it for about two
years, and during that time,
one of our friends and family
was saying, hang on a minute,
you don't have time
to help me now.
Can you just send me a recipe?
And we said, we
don't have recipes.
They were like, well,
start writing them up,
as if it's just easy to
come up with a recipe.
And we're like,
OK, and we started
to pull our recipes
together, and then
we said, let's put
them on a blog.
And we literally googled "how
to set up a blog" one day,
and then put it up.
And who's going to read it?
And yeah, that was the
very, very long story,
but it very much came from, it
was something we loved doing.
It was how we lived.
Our friends and
family wanted it,
then their friends wanted
it, and it just rolled,
I guess a bit like the
TV, "Food Matters."
Yeah.
>> So people call it
bloggers and authors,
but they don't realize that
we were actually, maybe,
cooking because that was when
it was all very underground
in the beginning.
So that's really how we started.
Very hands on, and very--
>> We didn't have a name.
Our clients called us food
fairies because we'd turn up,
we'd make the food, we'd
tidy up, and we'd leave.
We're very tidy, weren't we?
>> Cool.
I love it.
That's a cool story, and it
was a little bit like us, too,
because I think about
how we made a film.
We were googling "how
to light an interview."
>> Yeah.
>> How to what?
>> "How to light an interview."
>> Oh, my gosh, yeah.
>> Like, "how to start a blog."
We had film equipment
sent to Monte Carlo.
We were living in
France at the time,
and we started-- we
quit our jobs from there
and started filming.
>> It's the best way to do it.
>> It is.
Just go all out.
Take massive action.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> Great, so how
would you describe,
after all this journey
you've been through with
the traditional foods, and
then the German sauerkraut,
and the Filipino fish and
rice, I guess, mainly--
>> Yeah.
>> And then how would you
describe your nutritional
philosophy if you had
to put it in a package?
>> Ooh, that's a hard one.
That's why it's taken us
two cookbooks and a TV
show to try and distill it.
>> We've been seven
years running,
and there's no three-liner.
>> Everyone's like, can you
just say it in a nutshell?
I think, in a way,
it's something
along the lines of eating real
food and feeling your best.
That would be the
very crux of it all.
And then I love about how we
were chatting before as well,
is it's finding
what works for you,
not feeling you need
to stick in a box,
not feeling like you
need to give a label
or commit to something for
life because somebody wants
you to put a label on yourself.
>> We're taking it right back
to basics, because from there,
you can decide, does it suit me?
Do I need a bit more
raw food in my day?
Do I need to eat breakfast?
Do I need to snack more?
Do I need more meat?
Do I need less fats?
Do I need more fats?
I think what we do is we have--
when we're working with
our clients one on one,
we could call on the help
of many different people.
I mean, we introduced to--
we had clients who thought
that cornflakes, skim
milk, a coffee straight after
an hour and a on the treadmill
was the healthy way to live,
and they were exhausted.
They were mentally and
physically exhausted,
and they had weight
issues, sleep issues--
>> Mood issues.
And then they would
drink Diet Coke
and felt very deprived
at birthday parties,
knowing that one mouthful was
on their hip, so to speak.
So that was the kind of current
thinking for the clients
that we took on.
So we took them back to
basics with cooked foods,
reintroduced fats,
helped them to understand
what real foods were,
changed their bedtimes,
changed the water
that they drank,
changed the way that they
ate, and the relationship--
their whole relationship
with food changed.
>> And also we should
say, as well, it was--
we started with the food, but
then because they felt so good,
they'd come to us and say,
OK, so what next can I do?
Or my sleep's feeling better.
Is that because of the food?
And we're like,
what do you think?
And then another
thing is, it wasn't
just what they were eating.
It was how they were eating it.
So we'd sit down with
them, and we'd be like,
we're going to take 20
minutes, 30 minutes over this,
and they'd be like--
>> It's soup.
>> Yeah, I always eat while
I'm on a conference call,
or I always eat
when I'm doing this.
And we'd go, no,
let's just chill.
Let's just pick up a
spoon, put it in our mouth,
and put the spoon down.
And they would hate it.
They'd be like--
>> They'd really resist.
>> But so much of it
was down to the digest--
their digestion, and they just--
either they were
eating something
they thought was naughty.
So they'd eat it
really, really fast--
>> Chicken liver pate
would be one of them.
>> As if it hadn't happened.
Or it would be something
like vegetables.
Again, they'd eat it really,
really fast to get it over
and done with, and
it was about, again,
taking it back to basics,
slowing down, really
getting what you
needed out of the food.
>> So we're just talking about
conscious eating and how a lot
of the things that you noticed
improved in your clients was
their digestion, and they slept
better, and they felt better.
And how is it about the way
that we eat that affects
our digestion and our health?
>> Well, I think so many things.
I think a big one for
a lot of our clients
was this kind of punish versus
treat mentality behind food.
So in either way they were
looking at their foods
before they met us, perhaps,
was a bit of a rush.
It was a rush for the
pleasure of the ones
they really liked, or it
was a rush for the things
they didn't like--
>> To get it over.
>> Get it off their plate.
They'd eat their broccoli
first, because then they
could really focus on their
steak or whatever it was.
>> Or even, I don't really want
to eat that chocolate cake,
but if I do it really
quickly, it didn't exist.
>> And then it disappears
from all memory.
Another thing was the fact
that they were really--
they were spending so much
time stressing about food
or allocating that exercise
time and all the fearful
and anxiety around
food, but actually, they
were spoiling the whole
experience for themselves.
So maybe they would eat their
food-- they would say to us,
oh-- we would say,
here's some food we made.
And they were like, OK,
great, and they'd pick it up,
and they'd go off to maybe do
a Skype call or do something.
And we'd go, hey, let's
sit down together.
Let's enjoy it.
You're going to
feel better from it.
And another thing, as
well, was the satisfaction
they associated around
maybe this bowl of soup that
looked like nothing or
looked like a starter.
And they'd start to eat
it, and after 20 minutes,
it was just right.
It was the perfect
amount of food for them,
but had they just
inhaled it, they'd
have gone, right, what's
next, or what, that's
just a bowl of soup, where's the
bread, where's the main course.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> I was listening.
>> Sorry.
I suddenly got really hot.
>> Yes.
So we were talking
a bit earlier,
before we started filming,
about whether it was, in a way,
mindful eating.
But we couldn't really use that
word back then because they
hadn't--
these are people who did calorie
burning in the gym, not yoga.
It was-- we were working with,
yeah, a different set of--
>> The word mindful might
have just gone, whoa,
too much for them, because one
thing that we found, really,
from--
maybe you, too-- from
working with clients,
writing books, blogging, it's
about taking really small steps
with people, or
saying to people,
take whatever small step
you want to take from this.
Take what you want
from this, really.
Not going, you need
to do this, or you
need to do that, or
throwing too much at first.
So with our clients,
as well, we started off
by just simply
cooking for them as
if they were our boyfriend
or our friend or our mom.
And then they started
to sleep better,
and their moods improved.
Their energy improved.
One client said, my wife said
to me that I'm a nicer husband.
And then all of a sudden,
they go, OK, what's next?
And then they say, oh, well,
I go to the gym, and I box,
and I run, and I do all this.
What do you do?
And we'd say, oh, well, we do
yoga, and they'd be like, hm.
And then maybe after a week
of eating, feeling better,
sleeping better, they'd go,
OK, can I try your yoga person.
Can I come with you?
And slowly, slowly, the
different ways that we live
started to go into them.
And I remember the day that
a client said, oh, so what's
this meditation thing about?
>> Bingo.
>> And he came to it himself.
We didn't say,
hey, you know what?
You're eating better.
Why don't you do meditation now?
>> I think the best way to
do these things is to almost
introduce it like
it's their idea.
So often, we'll have clients--
we some of our clients still.
We catch up.
They'll be in another
country eating
an incredible bowl of food,
and they'll text it to us.
Or they'll say, I really
want a recipe for this.
Can you make something?
And then they'll start
telling you about something
they're doing that you
introduced to them a while
back, but it's become such
a part of their routine,
and they've then gone on to
tell other people about it,
they kind of think
it's their idea.
And then, wow, that's amazing
because some of our clients
were celebrities.
They had worked with personal
trainers, maybe dietitians
and nutritionists,
or other people,
and the focus was
always lose weight.
And then they got
to a place where
they would be maybe
jumping between retreats
and on smoothies--
>> Living like a monk.
>> Living like a monk, and then
coming back to London and being
on coffee, fast
food, and cigarettes.
And they just couldn't--
they're yo-yoing.
They knew there was
something out there for them.
So we introduced this
loving bone broth
cooked foods, introduced
digestion, and chewing slowly.
And you were saying,
how important is that?
And I think, because
we couldn't really
use this word "mindful"
and "connecting"
and that type of thing, we just
told them that actually all
the pleasure's in the mouth.
So you call yourself
a foodie, but you
seem to dump it straight in.
What's the point of going
to a five star restaurant
and literally inhaling?
And then just describing how
you're preparing your stomach.
You're sending
signals to your body,
and satisfaction
comes from this,
and helping them to
understand, to see
the difference between
feeling really satisfied
and being able to
get up and move on,
unless you live in a
country where you're
fortunate to have a siesta.
And the difference between
feeling like, I'm stuffed,
I can't move, because
that's something
that I encountered all the
time in my line of work.
People would literally
talk from breakfast
to lunch about how
hungry they are.
What is it they're going to eat?
Does anyone know
what the food is?
What are they going to order?
And 20 minutes later,
they are exhausted,
and they need a coffee
to cut through it,
so it's this extremes.
And so we talked about
staying on a lovely even keel
and being able to listen inside.
>> Cool.
A big part of the message
that I'm getting here,
of your core story, I
guess, around nutrition
and helping people, is
focusing on gut health.
And a lot of scientists
catching up now,
with the microbiome, and
the gut-brain connection,
and we're understanding
more about how this works.
What are your biggest
tips for people
to improve their digestion
and improve their gut health,
whether it's food based
tips, types of foods,
the way they approach food?
How would you try
to distill that?
>> I have to quickly
say about the gut thing,
because you can imagine, if
you can't say the word mindful,
trying to use the word "gut"
with clients who just think
of it as a--
>> A dirty word.
>> Or private word.
>> We'd say to them, how
are your number twos?
Do you say that--
number twos?
And fine, fine, fine.
>> Stop talking
about my number twos!
>> And then after about
four days, I said,
can we just talk about my poo?
It's amazing.
And then they just
see such a difference.
They almost didn't think there
was a problem before, and then
suddenly, they know what it's
like to feel really, really
good.
And that's quite a thing
for a lot of people,
because if you're hitting
rock bottom with your health,
you're willing to try anything.
But if you're someone
that thinks you're fine--
got a headache,
yeah, pop a pill.
I'm fine.
I'll move on.
I'm really tired.
Yeah, I'll just do
a couple of coffees,
and I'll deal with the
rest of the fallout later.
When you can actually
help those people
before they hit
rock bottom, it's
a lovely feeling because they--
it just shows how subtle
these things can be,
but how big the impact is.
What were you saying?
Best thing's--
>> Best thing.
Tips-- forgot how.
I think a big one is, what
we mentioned before, is
slowing down, taking time
over your food, chewing.
Going back to mom,
our mom used to say,
constantly-- she
still does actually--
chew, chew, chew, yes, chew.
Roll it around your mouth,
is what she used to say.
And she also used to say to
us, don't distort your mouth,
and what she meant by that was,
don't hamster cheek your food,
so don't put it over in
your mouth and go like that.
So as we were
growing up, yeah, we
had this mom who
would watch us eating.
But she was completely right
because people that eat--
when you see someone going--
a bowl of kale, or especially
if it's the massage kale,
it's raw, and they're inhaling
it, and I think, oh, my gosh,
you're going to be
farting so much later.
That is not going to
be a pleasurable thing.
So a big thing-- taking your
time, chewing really well.
As boring as it sounds,
you'd have to make it boring.
I mean, if everyone just
used to be the slowest
person at the table--
>> I am still really slow.
>> But actually,
if you slow down,
you can tend to have quite a
positive influence on everyone
else at your table
to slow down, too,
so they'd be some big ones.
Another one, we were talking
to you earlier-- broth.
We always talk to
people about broth.
We have these really,
really funny tote bags,
that I laugh when I see
someone on the tube--
>> Should have brought you one.
>> Yeah, we should
have brought you one.
We'll send.
>> We'll send.
>> --or a farmer's market, and
it says, "boil your bones."
We don't-- that was just a
catchy thing, but really,
we're simmering them.
It's a long, slow simmer.
And I know, in Australia, when
we came to Sydney actually
earlier in the year, we got sent
bone broth to our hotel room
by someone because they
knew we loved broth.
That was incredible.
>> Bone broth ice lollies
as well, or popsicles,
I think you call them.
Yeah, so the gut health
thing was where we really
came from when we first started
to work with our clients.
So it was all cooked foods.
It was all warming.
It was all-- we told
them don't bother
exercising through this time.
Pamper yourself.
Have long baths.
We're here to look after you.
And obviously, cooked foods
are much, much, much easier
to digest, and
training someone to eat
a bowl of soup over
25 minutes suddenly,
when they're faced
with a smorgasbord
of cooked and raw foods, they're
suddenly going to realize,
oh, I really do
have to slow down.
So one of the things we say
is, if, when you swallow it,
you still know what it is,
you didn't chew it enough.
So if you still know
what you're eating,
you swallowed a
chunk of broccoli,
you need to really make it
into soup in your mouth.
So is it that old saying of,
chew your drink and drink
your food.
>> Do you know that one?
>> Do you know it?
>> No.
Chew your drink and
drink your food?
>> So even, say, a smoothie--
>> Yeah, chew your smoothie.
I've heard that,
chew your smoothie.
>> And to drink your food means
break it right down into soup.
That's what you're-- the saliva,
that's what your teeth are for.
And then you're going
slowly, and you're not just
shoving it into your stomach.
So smoothies and
juices as well, you've
got to mix it with saliva.
You've got to slow it down.
It is a meal.
There is-- it's got
nutrients in it.
It's not just water.
But even water,
we say, don't just
throw it in and
throw it in cold.
So I think not having
harsh temperature changes,
so ice cream can be an
irritant for some people.
Eating regularly.
Eating slowly
because sometimes we
eat-- we just eat with our
eyes, and we're convinced
this is my normal
dinner portion.
But sometimes, you just
don't need that much.
Other days, you need double.
Eating early, so you
leave plenty of time
to digest before bed.
We prefer to have a steak
or any kind of meat dishes
at lunchtime rather
than in the evening,
unless it's like a bone
broth based vegetable soup.
We're really into activating
pulses and pseudo cereals
to make them easier to digest.
>> Can you give me
examples of what--
>> For example, so--
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Quinoa, amaranth.
>> Mung beans.
>> Do you use rice as well?
>> So we don't use
them in our recipes.
>> So you're mainly grain
free, you would say?
>> We're grain free, yeah.
We eat pseudo
cereals and pulses.
So it's not paleo,
and that's why
it's actually so difficult
to say what we do,
because there's no one label.
But we've found that, when
we just removed from--
well, it started
with the clients,
and then it went onto
the food philosophy.
Just by cutting out,
or providing recipes
that don't rely on
three things that
are prevalent in modern
eating, which is grains,
usually found in
their refined forms,
vegetable oils that
are highly refined,
and sugar, which
has gone from being
an expensive treat to freely
abundant and in everything.
So what we've done
is we provided
a way of eating that doesn't
rely on those three things,
so that when you
are out and about,
and you don't have
your kitchen at home,
and you grab artisanal
bread, and you
have some rice with your curry,
and you have this and that,
you're not overloaded
with those grains.
And they're the same
wheat as the main thing.
We tend to eat the
same type of wheat
for breakfast, lunch,
dinner, snacks.
>> Toast in the morning.
>> Toast.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
lunch, sandwiches.
>> Pizzas, pastries,
patisseries.
So yeah--
>> And another thing, you
need to go to our cafe.
We're going to send you there.
But two of the top
sellers in our cafe
are our sauerkraut
and our kimchi.
People absolutely
love it, and we're
starting to see more and
more now places offering
a jar of sauerkraut or kimchi
that you can add to your food.
And we say to people as
well, broth and sauerkraut
and kimchi--
people often think--
a lot of people
won't drink a green juice.
It's just too crazy
a taste for them,
and they're not used to it.
But when you have something
like sauerkraut or kimchi
or a broth, it's so delicious.
People don't think,
I'm eating something
because I know it's good for me,
or it's going to help my gut.
I'm eating it because it's--
when you put kimchi on a bowl of
buckwheat noodles or sauerkraut
with some sausages, it's
just absolutely delicious.
Same with the broth.
A soup-- the most
delicious soup that's
not made with a
broth versus the soup
made with broth, it's
just outstanding,
and the satisfaction
levels as well,
and how it keep you
feeling amazing.
>> Awesome, so mindful
eating, chewing.
>> Chewing.
>> Broths.
>> Yeah.
>> Fermented foods.
And what was your other one--
no sugar and no grains.
>> And also [INAUDIBLE].
>> And soaking your pulses.
>> Soaking your pulses--
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> And pseudo grains.
And when to eat?
What is your time clock
for how you would approach?
>> I think, in an ideal
world, people that travel--
Mel and I were--
we really--
>> It was six months of
just living in jet lag.
>> When you sleep after a 7:00
PM dinner, the sleep is just--
there's no comparison.
You just sleep so
well and so deeply
because you're not digesting.
But at the same time, if
we're out, we go for dinner,
and it's not ideal in
terms of digestion,
you don't want to
stress about that.
So we actually created 15
pillars in our second book,
"Good and Simple," to really
make it very easy for everybody
to understand what we're
about, seeing at we
couldn't do the three-liner
or the one-liner,
so they could glance over it.
But the most important
one at the bottom
was the Better Than rule.
So it's just doing what
you can when you can.
When you know better, you
do better, but there is--
we know.
I mean, we're not just--
from doing food, we
know that's not--
food is not the be
all and end all.
It's absolutely the attitude to
food and how you feel about it.
And we say to people, you will
get far more from a fast food
burger chewed slowly and enjoyed
than you will from the biggest
rainbow of vegetables and quinoa
and all kinds on your plate
if you're rushing, and
you're stressing about it.
I really believe that.
You just have to travel and
see the poorest people and what
they eat, and they're
thriving on something else.
So there's a lot more out
there than just the food,
but the food is
a fantastic place
to start because you
eat three times a day.
It's something that you
can kind of control.
Obviously, our books
are more geared
to people who do cook
their food and have access
and now may be looking
after families.
So what we're doing is
giving them a guiding--
>> A helping hand.
>> A helping hand because we've
got people who follow us who
are everything from vegan,
vegetarian, real food, paleo.
We had one lovely lady
who called and said,
I'm vegan, my husband's paleo,
and the children are messed up,
and your book helps us.
And just trying to shift
that thing, because it's--
what we're doing
is not-- yeah, we
have some kale salads, which
the Brits don't love the greens.
That's the history of
it, and we're very scared
of anything cauliflower.
But we're not all about
green smoothies and juices.
We're about soups and
stews, and that's things
that people two
generations ago grew up on.
And so we got in
there just at a time
when it's not completely alien.
I remember talking to a runner.
He does-- what's the
one where you go--
>> Cross country.
>> Cross country,
that kind of thing.
>> Or steeple chase?
>> No, it's-- yeah,
it's cross country.
Trail running.
>> Trail running.
>> And he was just saying,
oh, my knees, and this,
and my digestion, and all--
and he's living off these
energy gels and things.
And then he says, he just breaks
out the next day in spots,
and he has all kinds
of stomach issues.
And he was in his 20s, and
I mentioned bone broth,
and you could just see this
mix of horror on his face.
The word bones, the
word broth-- sounds
like a bit like a cauldron.
We've become so
distanced from our food,
and I think that is the
biggest problem, because we
say to people, if you grew
the food in your garden,
you had a farm next to you,
don't you need our book.
It's really-- our book
is a way of cutting
through all the different
ideas that have come up
in a time when there are now
guidelines on how to eat,
and those guidelines
serve many purposes.
So yeah.
>> So we've been talking a
lot about food, gut health,
digestion, but there's this
paralleling story about mind
and body connection.
Tell me a little bit about
some of the practices
that you do yourselves
or recommend to others
for calming the mind,
calming the body.
Because we know, when
you're in a calm state,
you digest better, you
approach life better.
You're a cool person as opposed
to being constantly in a--
>> Wound up tight.
>> Yeah.
>> Big time.
>> Tell me about this one.
>> One thing that just came
straight into my brain was--
I don't know who coined
the phrase, but I always
think of Arianna Huffington
when I think about it--
is the digital detox.
So it is getting rid of your
laptops, your TV, your phones,
any kind of-- any stimulant--
whether they're a good one or
a bad one, any kind of anxiety
around sitting and
eating your meal.
I even love-- one of the
things I love about cooking,
and I know not
everyone's the same,
is the act of
preparing the food,
even if it's just
a little thing,
because actually a lot of the
food I eat is from the freezer.
So I love soups, stews, dals.
Jazz is the same.
That's what a lot
of our recipes are.
So really, I've
just taken something
out the freezer in the
morning, I've let it defrost,
and I'm just heating up.
And somehow, that-- when you
turn the heat up, and the smell
starts coming, and that
starts to instantly calm me.
So I think even if you're
reheating something,
or you're buying a really good
quality ready meal, but the act
of heating it, preparing it,
making it look a bit attractive
on your plate--
I mean, we are very rustic.
We're no Ottolenghis.
We actually joke, if we put some
pomegranate seeds on things,
we go, oh, we're
being all Ottolenghi.
But it does help.
It helps you take your meal
a bit more seriously in a fun
way.
>> Connect with
your food as well.
>> Yeah, and that
instantly will--
I put the laptop away.
I start making the food.
My stress levels or my--
not mega stress, but my
kind of "I'm working"
stress levels go down
within that half an hour,
to then enjoy my meal and
have it sit really nicely.
That's the big
one-- digital detox.
>> I mean, I love that it's--
we're moving into a time now
when people are saying, OK,
the gut's a second brain.
Actually, it might
even be the first one.
And when we find out
that more messages are
sent from the gut
than the brain,
and the gut is bigger
and then you just have to
look at these old sayings,
like gut instinct, and--
>> Listen to your gut.
>> We've got tea towels
saying "get with your gut."
>> Butterflies, all those--
we say them.
We talk about vibes-- oh,
I got bad vibes from them--
but we don't really think
about what that means.
But as soon as you
realize that this
is how we were back in the day.
This is all we had to go
on, as much as anything.
Everything else can
change in a moment,
and yet we tend to rely on outer
forces or ideas to mold us.
So I think it's--
for us, meditation has been
a massive influence on us,
saying it's on
par with the way--
changing the way
we eat, if not more
because it can kind of
override everything.
It's almost like--
for me, I feel
like it's a secret tool I have.
Whatever happens,
I've got this in my--
>> Superpower.
>> Yeah, it's a superpower.
So even when, those
times you're flying,
and you get no
sleep on a flight,
and you know you've got
to get up the next day,
and you know you can just
think yourself better.
I mean, that's--
I mean, I was a born
worrier, and I think
that has helped me massively.
I was also the most brilliant
cat napper, and then as soon
as the business
started, and we were
looking after clients 24/7,
being able to nap went out
the window.
But I've got meditation,
and in meditation, it's
working no matter what I do, as
long as I intend to meditate,
and so been brilliant.
But also the mind-gut
thing, I think,
is great because it means you
can go at everything from two
areas.
So you're sitting
there, you're faced
with something that's probably
going to blow you apart
when you eat it.
But it's at a friend's
house, and you want to be--
and so just using your mind,
you can make it great for you.
Or you're having
a terrible time.
You've had a bad day.
You've had no
sleep, and you know
you can cook yourself something
that can make all better
and go to bed early.
I mean, I think that's
such a nice feeling,
to know we're not
reliant necessarily
on medicine from outside
or from other people
to make us feel better.
>> Beautiful.
I love it.
>> Oh, good.
So you two are both
very beautiful.
>> Thank you.
>> Oh, thank you.
>> And--
>> I'm sweaty.
>> Do you think--
yeah, it's hot.
It's hot.
Do you think that
how you eat or how
you approach food affects your
skin, affects your vibrancy,
affects your hair?
And tell me about--
>> Well, Mel's 90, and I'm 96.
>> Yeah, we're all girls.
Absolutely.
I mean, when we're really--
simple things.
I remember, when we write the
books, you get so into it,
you're almost chained to
the laptop a little bit,
especially when you get
into the editing process.
And you might still
be eating lovely food,
but you might be rushing
at that a bit more,
or you're kind of, oh, just get
to this bit before I have it.
So you leave your food,
or you don't get outside
for five seconds.
And then within a
week, maybe, you
can start to feel that
things aren't quite right,
or not feeling as good,
or not looking as good.
And then conversely,
you go away on holiday,
and you get out and get some
vitamin D-- it might not even
be a sunny day, but
it's a bright day.
It's not raining.
You're outside, and you feel so
much better straight from it.
We have people who--
a lot of our clients, when we
started with them, it almost
was by the third day that
we'd get the text or the phone
call going, I'm on board.
Maybe the first couple of
days, they'd be a bit grisly.
>> How many calories
are in this?
>> Yeah, worried,
anxious grisly.
>> Are you sure I'm
supposed to be eating fat?
>> Not eating their coffee.
Not having their evening treat.
Not having their, whatever
it was that-- their crux.
Third day, they'd
be feeling amazing.
I remember-- who was it?
Someone said, after
two weeks, they went,
someone commented on my skin,
and she's a 50-year-old lady.
And she said, someone
I hadn't seen for ages
commented on my skin
after two weeks.
She was having a lot of
broth and a lot of soups.
So not only the food that
you're eating and cooking
as part of a meal or something,
it's also the products
that you use, and
people start to go, oh,
what have you got
in your makeup bag?
Or when they go to
use your toilet, what
have you got in here?
And we are--
I don't know.
It's something to do with--
we are multi-purpose girls.
We like things that do a lot.
So your coconut oil--
we all know that good to fry in,
good to bake with, and so on.
But it's really good for hair.
It's great for
removing eye makeup.
It's good for dry bits.
We're seeing more and
more now, England,
big time in the last
year, these new brands
coming on board,
your almond oil based
body oils coming on board.
People talking about
apple cider vinegar
for putting on some spots
or something like that.
>> Turmeric.
>> The coconut oil.
Turmeric facemasks, which
can get a bit messy,
but are effective.
Avocado face masks.
Maybe oat scrubs, or
something like that.
>> Oh, sea salt baths,
putting ginger in the water,
that kind of thing.
So I think there's lots of--
>> Oh, a ginger bath is lovely.
>> Because that's lots of old
school things that you had
to do when they didn't-- you
couldn't just go out and buy
products.
I mean, I like to, have--
after, if I had an avocado,
I like to get the scrapings
and use that on my face
rather than mash up an entire
avocado and put it on my face.
>> Expensive.
>> They're pricey out here.
Or even a papaya skin or
something like that, you
can just lay that on your face.
But I think the biggest
one has to be, we
know about hydration and sleep.
Sometimes, there's
been some heavy moments
in the last couple of years--
I mean, this year,
we opened our cafe,
launched our second cookbook,
and did a TV series.
So I think, safe to
say, there's a few times
I looked in the mirror,
and I was pretty horrified.
And it's amazing how just
sleep fixes all that,
and also knowing that
you're not the same person
in a couple of years.
Every body part
renews, so you just
have to put a little
bit of work in.
Have a bit of sleep,
and sleep's free.
No one likes to do it.
We have FOMO--
>> So much to do.
>> Fear Of Missing Out,
that we push sleep away.
We convince ourselves that
things are more important.
>> Or we say that we
can catch up on it.
>> Yeah, but sleep is just
the number one for everything,
and I love knowing that we are--
how many percentage bacteria?
>> Well, there are 10 trillion
bacteria versus one trillion
cells, so a 10 10x bacteria
over cells in our body.
>> And then we're-- how many--
70% water.
And so just knowing all these
things, you don't think,
oh, I'm stuck with
this old carcass,
and I can't do anything.
There is-- I remember one
a meditation teacher said,
so this shirt that I bought last
year is older than my liver.
And I remember thinking, huh,
are trying to work it out.
And then I realized, because
everything-- an organ has--
obviously not wanting
to break everything down
into systems and
organs and parts,
because it's all
involved with each other.
But just knowing
that you can repair.
You just have to put
the intention there.
Ask for a little bit
of help from someone,
put in a little bit of effort,
and suddenly, hopefully,
come out the other side.
>> Thank you, ladies.
Been amazing.
>> Thank you so much.
>> So fun, and you survived
the heat in this room.
>> Oh, my gosh, have
we measured this heat?
Have we measured this heat?
It's like 45 degrees
in here, isn't it?
>> Pretty much.
>> I'm off to India
tomorrow, so [INAUDIBLE]..
>> You're preparing.
You're preparing.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you, ladies.
Well done.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you, thank you.
So good.
[MUSIC PLAYING]